This week on the podcast, a special
bonus episode. Corey Doctoro um has a
new book out entitled Inshitification,
all about the decay of digital
platforms. Uh I've been reading Corey uh
for a long time uh both at Boing Boing
and elsewhere. I'm I'm a big fan of his
takes on technology. I I thought this
conversation was really intriguing and I
think you will also with no further ado
my conversation with technology author
Corey [music] Doctoro.
Corey Drto, welcome to Bloomberg.
>> Thank you very much, Barry. It's a great
pleasure to be here.
>> It's a pleasure to have you. So you
before we get into the book I have to
just go into a little bit about your
background. I think of you as a writer
first but you have such a multiaceted
career. H how do you describe what you
do?
>> Well you know it's funny. Before I
became a British citizen when I was
living in London every time I landed I
had to fill in a landing card with my
occupation. It just had this little like
3/4 inch blank and I would eventually
just write in writer. But, you know,
trying to explain to my grandmother when
she was alive what I did for a living
was always challenging. I'm a writer.
I'm an activist. I've worked for the
Electronic Frontier Foundation for
nearly a quarter of a century now. It's
a digital rights group that tries to
make sure that your human rights apply
online and offline and these days that
the internet isn't taking away your
human rights offline. Um, I write
science fiction novels. I've written a
couple of dozen of those. Won a bunch of
awards. Had New York Times bestsellers.
Uh, and I'm a blogger. Uh, as you say, I
edited Boing Boing for 19 years and
these days I have my own blog
pluralistic.net
and I write about tech policy, culture,
um, science fiction, all kinds of stuff.
>> So, so let's let's start with tech
culture and, uh, EFF. What was the first
issue that got you interested in
exploring digital rights and just
protecting user rights uh, on the
internet? Well, like a lot of EFF
supporters, you know, I got started
reading about the stuff EFF was doing
long before I got involved with them.
So, uh, you know, one of the one of the
big cases that we got involved with very
early on was something called Bernstein.
>> Uh, so the NSA had classed encryption as
a munition and they said that civilians
should not be able to access working
encryption. They had a kind of weak form
of encryption they called DEZ50. It was
the defense encryption standard with 50
bits of key. And they said, "Dez50 is
good enough for anyone. Uh, the mafia
won't break it. Our foreign adversaries
won't break it. But, you know, the NSA
can break it if they need to." Uh, and
we tried all kinds of things to say this
was a bad idea. One of our founders,
John Gilmore, actually built a computer
called Deep Crack that could brute force
all of Dez50 in two and a half hours. It
cost a quarter of a million bucks and
it's actually in my office now because
John got tired of having [laughter] it
in his garage. Uh, and no one cared. But
then we went to court representing a
cryptographer, grad student at at
Berkeley called Daniel J. Bernstein who
had made an encryption program that was
stronger than DES50, that was as strong
as modern encryption. These days, you
know, when you take your distraction
rectangle out of your pocket and click
it, in the instant it takes for that
file to land on the mass storage, it's
encrypted so well that if every hydrogen
atom in the universe were a computer and
it did nothing until the end of the
universe but try and guess the key, you
would run out of universe before you ran
into keys. So he makes a working
encryption. It's kind of miraculous
modern thing. The thing that protects
your bank transactions and the firmware
updates for your anti-lock brakes and
your pacemaker and all that other stuff
that we want to keep secret and secure.
And uh we argued that he had a first
amendment right to publish his source
code. That source code was a form of
expressive speech under the first
amendment. We won in the district. We
won at the appellet division in the
ninth circuit. The NSA didn't want to
take their chances with the Supreme
Court. And ever since then, code has
been speech and we have had the tools to
have secure communications.
>> So I recall you being very involved with
uh digital rights management and Napster
and Groster and what was the video
version of that. There was a
>> the broadcast flag,
>> right? Uh that's when I I I that's when
I first realized, oh, he's more than
just a curator. He's really very much an
activist. um you started writing about
surveillance and monopolies and
information asymmetries I don't know is
it 20 25 years ago tell us a little bit
about that
>> well I'm partly it's because I'm a
science fiction writer and so as a
science fiction writer the thing that
I'm most preoccupied with is not what do
gadgets do but who do gadgets do them
for and who do gadgets do them to I I
think of science fiction as a kind of um
inverse of this kind of vulgarism that
says says there is no alternative. You
know Margaret Thatcher used to say there
is no alternative so often they called
her Tina there is no alternative. What
she meant was like stop trying to think
of an alternative, right? And and you
know when you are a technologist and
that's my background. I was a software
developer and when you have that kind of
science fiction imagination, you look at
the things that you're using, you're
thinking why do we have to take the bad
with the good, right? Why is the product
designer here delivering me a prefeast
menu that's full of a bunch of stuff
that no one would ever want to eat
instead of just the allocart that has
the things that I want. And so uh I
started to wonder why we couldn't you
know seize the means of computation take
the things that we were using and you
know make them work for us not for
someone else. They sell you a printer
that only takes gener third party ink
you modify the printer so it takes
generic ink. They sell you a phone that
only uses their app store. You modify it
so it uses anyone's apps. They put you
uh on the web and they start spying on
you. Well, you put in a privacy blocker.
You know, more than half of all internet
users have installed an ad blocker. It's
the largest consumer boycott in history.
Wow.
>> And it means that whenever a product
manager sits down to think about like
how invasive and obnoxious should our
ads be, they kind of have to contend
with this possibility that users will
take it upon themselves to correct the
situation to make a counter offer.
Right? My offer is I'm going to show you
this web page, but I'm going to spy on
you and and and bombard you with ads.
your counter offer might be how about
no, right? And and so, you know, that's
dangerous because if like making your
ads 20% more obnoxious makes 40% of your
users put in an ad blocker, you don't
get money from them anymore. And no one
ever goes back to the search engine and
types, how do I start seeing ads again?
So, that's that's a permanent thing. And
you know, one of the big changes and one
of the things that I've tracked over
these these this quarter century is the
rise and rise of IP rules that prohibit
that kind of modification. So the
biggest one being something called
anti-ircumvention law, which is law that
just says you can't modify something
that's designed not to be modified. In
other words, if the programmer
>> despite the fact that you paid for it
and you own it,
>> it's yours, you want to do something
legal with it. So if a programmer
basically when they're writing the code
does the equivalent of drawing a chalk
dotted line around some of the code and
says like don't look in here or change
this under laws like the Digital
Millennium Copyright Act of 1998. It
becomes a felony to change it even for a
lawful purpose. And so you know an app
it's just the web but it has these these
these technical protection measures that
make reverse engineering illegal. So an
app is just a website you know skinned
in the right IP to make it a felony to
defend your privacy when you use it.
This is why, you know, bosses are so
horny to make you use their apps and not
their websites. Right.
>> Right. So, it's interesting because you
lived in in Europe and and in particular
in London for so long. It seems like the
Europeans have a much more userfriendly
perspective on privacy rights and
digital rights. How far away is the
United States from, if not the Platonic
ideal, just the way Europe does it? Or
or am I giving them too much credit?
Well, look, I don't think it's
necessarily because the Europeans are
better at regulation than the Americans.
I think it has a lot to do with the fact
that the companies that abuse us on the
internet are not called Nokia, Oliveti,
uh, Ericson, Deutsche Telecom, right?
It's a lot easier to get the political
space to do evidence-based policy when
your economy isn't so focused and
controlled by a small number of very
dominant firms. Just that's just the
rail politique here. I think though that
something is changing in Europe and and
it has changed over the last few years
and it's about to accelerate quite a lot
I believe. Um, so for a long time the
European approach to tech was to try and
make them behave themselves, right? So,
you know, Mark Zuckerberg has a platform
with a lot of abuse and hate speech and
harassment. They say, Mark Zuckerberg,
you have to prevent that, right? And
what they're saying to him is the
problem isn't that you have the power.
The problem is how you wield the power.
We would like you to wield your power
more responsibly. And in fact, if you
need more power to do that, right?
Because if you're going to stamp out
harassment on a platform, you have to
know what every user is doing and have
the power to stop them. So even if you
need to arrogate more power to yourself
over your users, that's okay. Just use
the power in the way that we want. It's
kind of a constitutional monarchy,
right? He is the absolute ruler, but he
he you know suffers himself to be dh
draped in like gilded chains held by his
courts, right? In the last few years,
the European Union has started to
regulate as though the problem was the
power itself. Not that Mark Zuckerberg
was bad at being the social media for
four billion people unelected with an
office for life, but rather that that
office shouldn't exist. And so they've
started to impose things like
interoperability requirements that make
it so that if you leave a social media
platform, when you get somewhere else,
blue sky, mastadon, something that
doesn't exist because why would you
capitalize something when everyone's
locked into Facebook or or Twitter? Um,
when you get there, you should be able
to see the messages posted by the people
you left behind. you should be able to
uh have discourse with them, be part of
those communities in the same way that
like when you switch from, you know,
Vodafone to T-Mobile, you do some
administrative work and a few seconds
later your phone number cuts over. No
one
>> doesn't seem to work that way. You used
to be able to drag your either the
people you were following or your own
followers from Twitter to to Blue Sky
that
>> that those AIs got
>> Yeah. They made it a lot harder. So So
it wasn't that you could drag them over,
you could find them, right? A and this
was all cutting off the this is what
must did when he cut off the API is he
made it much harder to build those
migration tools and so you know the EU
is like focusing on those migration
tools and they're about to become a lot
more focused because of Trump's foreign
policy. So for more than 20 years, I
have gone around the world, more than 30
countries on behalf of EFF and talked to
policy makers about what would make a
better internet policy. Things like
improved uh interoperability rules, the
right to reverse engineer, modify,
better privacy rules. And what they've
said at every time is that well, we'd
love to do that. It sounds very
sensible, but the US trade
representative has made it very clear
that if we don't have policies that
protect the rent extraction of American
firms, they're going to hit us with
tariffs. Well, you know, happy
liberation day, right? [laughter] If if
if the guy says,
>> "Oh,
>> wait. This trade thing is two-sided. Is
that what you're suggesting?"
>> So, if the guy says, "Do what I tell
you, I'm going to burn your house down."
You do what he tells you, and he burns
your house down anyways, you're kind of
a sucker if you keep doing what he tells
you to do. And not only that, but Trump
has made it so clear that what we used
to call American trading partners are
now America's rivals, right?
>> And that that rivalry will be pursued
through the American tech giants. You
know, this is what we were told Huawei
was going to do to us. Every accusation
is a is a confession, right?
>> That's that's exactly right.
>> You know, uh when the International
Criminal Court swore out a complaint
against Benjamin Netanyahu for genocide,
uh Trump denounced this and then
Microsoft terminated his online
accounts. He lost his email, he lost his
address book, he lost his uh calendar,
and he lost the working files of the
International Criminal Court. Well, this
has lit a fire under Europe, right?
They're now pursuing this thing they
call Euro Stack. there's a lot of money
for it and they want to replicate
American text stacks. They want to
replicate the data centers. They want to
replicate the applications, Google Docs
and so on and so on. The problem is no
one is ever going to copy and paste a
million documents from their government
ministry one at a time out of GD docs
and into a Euro stack. This sounds very
much like Europe has a Tik Tok problem
the way the United States does. Only the
issue is American tech companies, not a
Chinese social media network. And and
honestly, I don't think Tik Tok is doing
what they say they're doing. And if they
are, the best way to solve that is to
just update American Privacy Law because
it's that's the pro. You know, the last
time we got a new privacy law in
America, you may know this, it was 1988.
It was when Ronald Reagan signed the
Video Privacy Protection Act. It makes
it a crime for video clerks to disclose
your VHS rentals. Everything else is
fair game, right? Why is Tik Tok spying
on you? That's why Tik Tok because we
let them, right? Um, but you know, in
Europe, when they reach this point where
they're not going to be able to migrate
from these old American services to
these new European services, they're
going to have to start reinvigorating
their reverse engineering game and make
it so that you can run headless phones
in the cloud that impersonate users and
iterate through the documents and move
them over, do scraping or alt clients,
ondevice bridging, all this stuff that
we used to do all the time, right? That
was like Ross Perau's business, right?
is helping people move data between
systems that we used to do all the time.
This as as they would say in the Star
Wars universe, this elegant weapon from
a more civilized age. They're going to
have to revive it because right now it's
like they've observed a giant housing
crisis in East Berlin and so they built
a bunch of houses in West Berlin. And
they're not thinking about how the
people are going to move in. They're
going to have to tear down the wall,
right? And so this is in some ways one
of the most amazing things to happen in
digital rights in my whole career. It's
sort of analogous to what happened when
Putin invaded Ukraine. You know, there
used to be all these structural reasons
they couldn't solarize Europe, right?
Planning, permission, electrical and
safety codes, and so on. All of a
sudden, when you're shivering in the
dark, that stuff isn't so important. And
now Europe is 10 years ahead of their
solar transition plan. Right? I think
that we're about to get this on a global
scale, not at least because economically
it makes so much sense. So you think
about the extraction from these locked
platforms, right? Inkjet Inc. Inkjet
Inc. the most expensive fluid you can
buy as a civilian without taking a
special license. Uh it would be cheaper
to print your grocery list with the
seaman of a Kentucky Derby winning
stallion. [laughter]
>> That's unbelievable.
>> And you know the only reason we don't
have generic ink in our printers is
because it's against the law to like
make modifications to printer firmware.
So it doesn't check for generic ink.
>> But you can buy or just don't work
reliably, right? And the printer
companies push non-consensual updates to
your printer that shuts this down. And
they've done all kinds of sleazy things
like HP pushed an update in March that
was a security update that was like a
Manurion candidate, a sleeper agent. It
sat there until September. Didn't do
anything. Waited for all the parents to
go to Costco and buy back to school kits
of generic ink and then it detonated and
all that ink was useless. Right? So
they're trying to like send a message to
America's parents, don't buy generic ink
ever. You never know when it's going to
stop working. They were like maximizing
the pain here.
>> Unbelievable. Absolutely unbelievable.
So, literally had to have a conversation
with the powers that be to figure out
how to say the title of your book, which
ironically has been named the word of
the year in in two separate major three.
I s found two in my research.
>> Oh, two dictionaries, but three
countries.
>> Three countries.
>> So, let's talk about inshitification.
How do you define it in a way that we
can broadcast without running a foul of
the
>> course? Well, you know, working for the
Electronic Frontier Foundation as I have
for so long, my job has really been
about trying to raise the salience and
the urgency of these digital issues that
are very abstract, very technical. You
know, they eventually become very
concrete, but it's when your house is on
fire, you kind of want people to get
active before then. And so that's a game
of coming up with simileies and
metaphors and framing devices, funny
words, parables and so on. And the
latest of these is this one in
shitification. And in shitification is
both an observation about how things go
bad uh and also a theory about why
they're going bad. And so the
observation is quite straightforward.
And in the first phase, you have firms
that are good to their end users but
find a way to lock those users in. In
the second phase, they make things worse
for those end users and they rely on the
lock in to stop those end users from
departing and they make things good for
business customers. In the third phase,
they lock in those business customers
and extract all of their surplus as
well. They leave behind the kind of
meanest homeopathic residue needed to
keep users locked to the platform,
businesses locked to the users, and they
extract everything for themselves, and
they turn into a pile of crap. That's
the kind of um observational end of it.
But the question I want to interrogate
is why is it happening now? Right?
Because we didn't invent greed in the
middle of the last decade. The people
running these companies are often the
same people who ran them from day one.
You know, Mark Zuckerberg was running
Facebook from his Harvard dorm to today
and he owns the majority of the voting
shares. Uh Google actually got worse
when Sergey Brenn came back in terms of
its its path to platform decay. So what
is it that made these companies bad now?
And I think really the way to understand
that is to ask the inverse, which is why
weren't they worse before? Because
obviously firms would like to charge
more, deliver less, pay less to their
suppliers, pay less to their employees,
seek more beneficial terms for
themselves. And when you phrase it that
way, you know why firms don't do it?
Because if you charged infinity and paid
nothing, well, maybe you'd be running a
scholarly journal, but if you're not
running a scholarly journal, no one
would do it, right? you you would you
would lose your employees, you'd lose
your customers. You have to labor under
the discipline of competition, of
regulators, and if you're in tech, you
had other sources of discipline like
interoperability, the ability to make
two programs work with each other. So
maybe if you had a rent extraction
scheme, someone would alienate your
users from you by coming up with a
plug-in that made it possible for them
to avoid that rent extraction scheme.
And those customers would then discover
that there was a better firm out there
and they might switch to becoming the
customers of them. And you had to worry
about your workers because tech workers
were so powerful and they often really
fought hard for their users. They cared
about their jobs. And so my thesis is
that when we dismantled these sources of
discipline, we created what you could
call the initic policy environment,
right? The environment that rewards the
firms that do the worst, that rewards
rewards the factions and the firms that
advocate for the worst, that rewards the
impulses and CEOs that are tempted to do
the worst and then the worst happened.
So, let's talk about some of these firms
because I imagine
everybody has experienced
the title of your book, platform decay
is the phrase I I like to use. Um I mean
in my experience and I'm a few years
older than you. It began with Microsoft
the probably the you know Swe Jenerys
first uh company that figured out how to
lock people in and then abuse the
monopoly position they had. That was
followed by let's go through the list
eBay, Google, Amazon. I I I would be um
biased if I didn't include Apple. I
think I can also include Starbucks and
other entities like that. Yeah.
>> Um I have a peeve with them because they
basically threatened users with their
Starbucks points during the pandemic. I
thought that was very misguided and Oh,
okay. See youa. That was an easy
platform to wait. Um there was an
article in the Wall Street Journal that
the Starbucks app you would load it up
with a credit card. Wait, why do I have
to give you $50? just hit my credit
card, right? And it turned out it was a
three or four billion dollar interest
free loan their users were giving free
cash flow.
>> So So that was a little bit of a Oh, and
you want to take my points? All right,
I'm done with you. Not boycotting them.
Just
>> they just kind of fell off my first
choice. But let's I'm curious.
>> They overcook their beans, too.
>> Right. Well, if you like strong coffee
and don't mind a little bit of
bitterness.
>> Sure.
>> For sure. But I'm curious, what were
your experiences that led to the book?
What what was the first platforms that
you watched decay?
>> Well, let me be clarify a little here
because there is there have been lots of
platforms that have decayed, but they
didn't shall on, right? I think that's
one of the mysteries that I'm trying to
plum here, right? Well, there's a
difference between a company like
MySpace that just loses out to a
superior technology or a better
interface or whatever
>> versus something where the entire
platform follows the pattern that you've
outlined
>> and they but but and then they stay in
business, right? That's the thing that I
want to interrogate
>> profitably. Wildly profitable.
>> Yeah. So, you know, uh let's think about
a few examples that you just raised and
and what happened when they initified,
right? So, Microsoft, I was a you
mentioned Apple and you said you'd be
biased if you didn't mention Apple. I
was a kind of CIO for hire in the early
2000s and every shop that I would
>> chief info or chief investor.
>> Chief info. Chief info. Yeah. Never
chief investor. I invested all my.com
money wisely in laptops. I'm sure
they're going to appreciate someday. Uh,
no. I I was I was going around helping
little SMMES get online. I put up their
LAN. I get the file server, everything.
And they all had a problem, which is
that they'd have a couple of Macs in the
shop. And they couldn't read or reliably
read or write Microsoft Office files
because Microsoft Office uh Microsoft
off Microsoft Office for the Mac was the
most cursed piece of software to come
out of Redmond. You just wave the floppy
disc around the office and files would
spontaneously go corrupt. And so
eventually you'd go to the designer and
maybe the CEO would have a PowerBook and
you'd put a a a PC on their desk that
was just for like Excel, Word, and
PowerPoint.
>> And uh then that was kind of unwieldy.
So then you put a big graphics card in
there. You'd buy Windows versions of all
the the programs the graphic designer
used and you throw away the Mac. And so
Steve Jobs knew that this was a problem.
He didn't just beg Bill Gates to fix
Office for the Mac. He reverse
engineered Office for the Mac. He
reverse engineered the office file
formats and he made i work pages numbers
in keynote right which can perfectly
read and write the Microsoft office file
formats. So what he did in economics
terms is he uh reduced the switching
cost to zero because you didn't have to
leave any of your files behind when you
went from Windows to a Mac. Uh and he
solved the collective action problem of
convincing everyone to move to a Mac
because you didn't have to. You could go
to the Mac and other people could join
you when they were ready. This saved
Apple's bacon. I recall the famous Prey
cover of Wired in 1998 and my pet theory
or it's not even mine
>> is that Microsoft cut a deal in order
>> there was already the antitrust
bubblings. So hey we have to keep a
legitimate operating system competitor
around otherwise
>> controlled opposition. That's right.
>> Well yeah and they ran these switch ads
if you'll recall how easy it was to
switch. So this was this incredible
moment. Now, what would happen if you
did this to Apple, right? We have people
locked into the iPhone today. Their apps
are there, their data is there, and so
on. It's not hard to like make an iPhone
emulator that runs on another computer,
including like on on an Android device,
right? And so, you could run all those
apps, you could access all that data. If
you did that to Apple today, if you did
unto Apple, as Apple had done unto
Microsoft, first they'd hit you with
section 121 of the Digital Millennium
Copyright Act for circumvention. That's
a $500,000 fine and a 5year prison
sentence for a first offense. Mhm.
>> Then they would call you a torchious
interfer with their contract for
violating their terms of service. And
they might hit you with criminal terms
of service violation under the Computer
Fraud and Abuse Act. They would call you
a copyright violator. They call you a
trademark violator, a patent violator.
Uh maybe if you hired some ex employees,
they'd say that you're going after their
trade secrets. And maybe there are ex
employees non non-disclosures. Um they
would basically nuke you till you
glowed, right? And so it's true
platforms went bad all through history,
but they had counter maneuvers. You
know, it wasn't [snorts] just that
MySpace was out competed by Facebook. It
was that when Facebook was trying to
lure users over from MySpace, it gave
them a bot and you gave that bot your
login and password and it would go to
MySpace several times a day, it would
grab everything in your MySpace feed and
put it in your Facebook feed so you
could reply to it and it would push it
back out again. So again, you didn't
have to choose between the people that
you loved on MySpace and the superior
application that was Facebook because
Facebook's pitch at the time was don't
use MySpace. It's owned by an evil
billionaire. No one wants to use social
media owned by an evil billionaire.
Plus, [laughter] did you know they spy
on you, we're never going to spy on you
at Facebook, right? But you know, no one
is going to just smuggly read the
superior terms of service while they
wait for their dumb friends to join them
on Facebook. They're going to be where
their friends are. So they just solved
that problem for them. Now in the book I
tell the story of a an app called OG app
was created last year by a couple of
teenagers. They just reverse engineered
Instagram. And so you would give
Instagram you give the app your
Instagram login and password. It would
go to Instagram pretend to be you would
grab everything in the queue waiting to
be shown to you and it would throw away
the ads. It would throw away the
recommendations. It would throw away the
boosted content. It would throw away
everything that been like surfaced from
three months ago because it was getting
clickbait. And it would just show you
the things that the people you followed
had posted in reverse chronological
order. It was the OG app.
>> It's what Facebook did to to MySpace.
They're doing to a Facebook owned
property.
>> And so within 24 hours, it was in the
top 10 on both app stores. Wow.
>> And then that night, Apple and Google
shut it down at Meta's request.
>> No kidding.
>> Because now we have these choke points.
And it turns out that there is honor
among thieves, right? They will all
defend to the death one another's
ability to structure whole markets and
decide which products can reach
audiences, how profitable those products
can be, what they can charge, uh whether
or not you can even use them. Right? All
of those things are now being privately
regulated by entities that are not
winning their markets alone, but rather
are enlisting the state to win their
markets. So
people have different views about how
much industrial policy we should have
and so on, but nobody I think that I
know of is like we should have
industrial policy, but the way that it
should work is that the government
should find some monopolists, pay no
attention to what they're doing except
when the monopolists get angry, and then
destroy anyone they're angry at. That is
like the weirdest form of industrial
policy I've ever heard of.
>> And that seems to be the sort of policy
we have. Let let's talk a little bit
about the crapification of Amazon.
>> Sure.
>> Which which the great reveal to me was
during the pandemic when they would
frequently run out of stuff and then
sometimes it would be at Walmart,
sometimes it would be at uh Target,
sometimes it would be on uh Instacart.
And the shock of the pandemic to me was
these guys have been I I've had an
Amazon account since I got a gift from a
college roommate. I want to say it was
98 something like that. So a long time.
And the same with eBay. Um and suddenly
you discovered that Amazon wasn't the
lowcost provider.
>> And then the free overnight shipping.
It's like hey your shipping day is
Wednesday. We'll send it to you on
Wednesday or we'll give it to you
tomorrow for $3.99. Wait, this isn't
next day shipping or even two day
shipping. And then the last insult
>> was the advertisement. I was searching,
you know, the little lithium batteries
for key fob for car. Sure. Like they're
very specific. Duracell 5374.
You put that in the search bar and the
first thing that pops up, it's a
Duracell. You click it, you send it, you
open up the package. Wait, this isn't a
5374. What? Why? Why are you I'm
advertising for this exact size,
voltage, whatever. Why on earth would
you show me something else and I'm
enough of a jerk that I make them pay me
the $289 for it and I send it back?
>> So, you remember Lily Tomlin's bits on
SNL where she would pretend to be
Ernestine the phone operator doing these
commercials for for well it started on a
laugh and she took it to I've I've been
corrected by so many pedantic people but
she started on laugh and she did it on
SNL. She did more segments on SNL than
on that. That's interesting.
>> So, it's But yes, I I I but both and she
would at the end of these ads for the
Bell system, she would turn to the
camera and she'd say, "We don't care. We
don't have to. We're the phone company."
Right? One of the insights I think that
Lena Khan had when she was in office
that really landed was that companies
don't just become too big to fail. They
don't just become too big to jail. They
become too big to care. That when they
when they're insulated from consequence,
they do this. Now, what's striking about
Amazon is the growth that they've
experienced from rent, right? Not from
products, but from rent. So, you
mentioned the advertisements. When I
wrote this book, their so-called ad
market, which is the polar markets, the
payment for for placement in the search
results,
>> that was like a $ 32 billion business.
It's now a 50 something billion
business. This is remarkable growth. And
that's the reason that the first item in
your Amazon search result is on average
29% more expensive than the best match
for your search
>> or just the wrong item. It's amazing.
>> Sure. And then the top bar 25% and then
you to you get down to position number
17 or so and that's where you find the
good result. And of course the companies
spending more to advertise have less
surplus to allocate to product quality.
And so they're just dominating these
search results and they're they're
shipping bad things to you. By the same
token, every merchant on Amazon is
paying junk fees to list on Amazon. And
most of these fees are listed as
optional. Practically speaking, if you
don't pay them, you won't get there. So,
you have to do fulfillment by Amazon,
you have to pay for Prime, you have to
pay for advertising. When I wrote the
book,
>> it was, depending on the estimate, 45 to
51%. Wow.
>> Uh, in junk fees. Today, in the New York
Times, Tim Woo cites 50 to 60%.
>> That's un New York Times factecking. I
think he's he wouldn't make that. And
I've known Tim since we were in
elementary school together 50 years ago.
>> Professor, right?
>> Columbia professor. We both grew up in
Toronto. Like all like all the best
Americans, we're Canadians.
>> So in the book you talk, it's funny
because I'm assuming the advertising on
Amazon yields a result. In the book you
talk about how the process of decay got
worse and worse at Facebook and what was
it 2018 Proctor and Gamble said, "We're
just going to cut
>> 2017." Yeah. $200 million in advertising
and they saw zero decrease in sales.
>> Yeah. So, one of the things that that
Facebook did early on was allocate a lot
of resources to anti- fraud because ad
fraud is very easy. You think about how
the ad market works, it was very
complicated and you know, if you're a
publisher and you're getting paid by the
click, you can just fire fake clicks on
ads,
>> right? Buy farms and everything else.
>> Yeah. Yeah. or you know just websites
that don't even exist that are just
loading like they just they only exist
like in as a series of API calls that
are then uh generating click responses
and and so on you know it can be very uh
uh lucrative and so they put a lot of
money into policing this and then they
just drew down that spend because it's
expensive
>> right and so you just let
>> providing a quality product and service
is expensive
>> and so you let $200 million disappear
down the fraud hole right that's someone
else's problem right it's not Facebook's
problem I'm Sure, Facebook would prefer
a fraud-free marketplace, but why
bother, you know, goldplating their anti
fraud?
>> When one of the biggest advertisers in
the purchasers of the country says,
"We're cutting this out because your ads
are garbage." That's why,
>> well, they're back now, though. They
reinstituted it and they just have more
anti- fraud on their own end. So,
they're internalizing those costs.
>> They're doing more auditing on their
end.
>> Unbelievable. So, we talked about
Facebook, we talked about Amazon. Gotta
ask about Uber
>> which has all sorts of interesting
platform issues.
>> The big one was when the VCs first
realized, hey, we have to stop
subsidizing these millennials and allow
the pl prices to float freely. The one
I've noticed over the past year or two
is there's time as it exists in the
universe and then there's time on the
Uber app waiting for a car that seems to
have no correlation to the actual time.
What's going on with Uber in terms of
what they pay people surge pricing and
their their wonky perspective on on
time?
>> So when Uber kicked off, they tapped the
capital market. Specifically, they got
Masayoshi's son, star of Stage and
Screen, the man who gave us Yahoo buying
and destroying every promising web 2.0
company and we work and these days Open
AI's latest round. And he went to his
favorite suckers, the Saudi royal
family, and he got $ 31 billion out of
them. And then they lost 41 cents on
every dollar for the next 13 years. They
just lit it on fire. But that did have
some salutoy effects from their business
perspective. It provoked a lost decade
in transit investment all over the world
because why invest in transit when it's
so cheap. They put medallion cabs out of
business everywhere. And they used
predatory pricing to freeze out all but
one also ran ride hail company which is
Lyft. Uh and then having effectively
cornered a market and spent a lot of
money on policy adventurism. Think about
the $225 million that was spent in
California on Prop 22 to formalize the
worker mclassification, allow them to,
you know, only pay the drivers when they
had a passenger in the car and not when
they not when they were cruising around
giving free labor and wear and tear on
their cars to to the company. Um, they
were able to raise prices and they were
able to lower wages and to do both they
tap um both uh private data and uh
algorithmic uh fluidity. So the labor
econ or the the lawyer rather labor
lawyer uh Vina Dubal uh coined this term
algorithmic wage discrimination. It's
when two workers are offered a different
wage based on the algorithms's
estimation of their desperation. And so
in the case of Uber the way that this
works is if you take a low ball offer
and when you get an offer as an Uber
driver you just a few seconds to say yes
or no. And you got to figure out like
mileage minutes and so on. When you if
you take that offer and it's lower than
your historic rate, then that becomes a
new ceiling and they start to nudge you
down lower and lower.
>> Really? That's unbelievable.
>> Yeah. So drivers, they bucket themselves
into pickers and ants. And the pickers
are picky and the ants take everything.
And ants have their wages go down and
down and down. And the idea is to turn
every picker into an ant because a uh an
ant is subsidizing the company, right?
They're just driving around and around.
They're on the road no matter how
garbage the fairs are. uh it's it's
great for the company and of course if
you can take a low ball offer and you
can find a passenger who will take a a
price gouging offer then the difference
is the companies to to to suck up and so
we on the passenger side we have our own
version of this where they are doing all
kinds of calculations in the back end to
calculate how desperate we are to to
take the ride. Now, it used to be that
they had this whole thing about, oh,
we're going to match supply with demand
using price signals. We'll have surge
pricing when everyone gets out of a
Dodgers game. We'll we'll crank up the
price and that'll that'll drive drivers
out. That's not what they do anymore,
right? They do have surge pricing. They
just keep the surge,
>> right? Unless the drivers won't take it.
Now again, if if it were lawful to do
reverse engineering modification, you
could imagine drivers doing what they're
already doing in other countries like in
Indonesia, gig riders, because they
don't drive cars. They they ride
motorbikes there and those are the taxis
and delivery vehicles and so on. Those
gig riders, they started these little
clubouses because you need somewhere to
pee and to have a cup of tea and and you
know, work on your bike. And those
clubouses turned into co-ops and the
co-ops started commissioning software.
And they commissioned software to modify
their dispatch apps. And it started
pretty modest. It started with um the uh
well understood tendency of graphic
designers to torment the rest of us by
making all their type eight point gray
type on white. Right? And all the older
riders are like I cannot see my goddamn
phone and I'm in traffic. Make the type
bigger and black. But these days it's
stuff like an app that allows all the
riders to say none of us will take a
ride that's a lowball offer. So
automatically calculate the mileage and
the per minute when you get the offer
over the air and just turn it down
automatically so that you can force the
algorithm to force the wage up. Right?
Drivers here can't do that. Not because
it's technically impossible, because
it's unlawful. You know the
>> why would that be unlawful. It's like a
union
>> because you're bypassing the the
technical protections in the app and
under section 121 of the digital noname
copyright act that's illegal even if
you're doing so for a lawful purpose. So
the mere presence of a of what's called
an effective means of access control in
the statute uh creates a zone where you
cannot enter irrespective of the
legitimacy of the reason for your entry.
That's unbelievable. You would think
they could create a very simple um
client app where the server is the one
that's doing all that. It's not and just
do the calculation and say no.
>> Yeah, but scraping the so that scraping
the number right when it comes in is
illegal.
>> You're not even scraping it. You're just
you're seeing it. You don't have to go
to their site and screen.
>> No. No. But it's on your device. But on
your device,
>> right?
>> They're blocking other apps, but they're
blocking other apps from reading what
one app one app by design, one app can't
see what the other app is doing, which
is good. You kind of want that, right?
You don't want you don't want like the
malware in your browser seeing your
private messages. Right. That's fair.
>> But um you as the owner of the device
could certainly say, "Well, I give
permission for this."
>> Right. Right.
>> But uh for someone to write the app that
bypasses that control even with
permission from the owner is unlawful
because that control itself has its own
zone of protection that is not in the
control of the owner of the device. It's
in control of the author of the
software. I I'll give you a quick
example. That's unbelievable.
>> All the audio books on Audible
>> are sold with these technical protection
measures. Yeah. They only play on
Amazon's approved apps.
>> They're 90% of the market. That means
every time I sell you an audio book, I
create a switching cost for you, right?
And so if Amazon screws me and I leave,
I have to you I have to guess whether
you're willing to throw away all your
audio books to follow me.
>> No. Well, I mean, who how many people
listen to the same audio book twice?
>> Lots of people have big libraries. Lots
of people have big libraries. So, here's
the thing. If I give you a tool to move
your audiobook library from one app to
another, I the author of the book, and
in this case, I read the book aloud
myself in a studio. I financed the
production. I paid the director. I paid
the engineer. This is my copyright from
top to bottom. This is
>> allowed to do that.
>> Not only do I commit a crime,
>> but I create I commit a more serious
crime than you would if you pirated the
audio book. I face a worse sentence than
if you shoplifted the audiobook on CD at
a truck stop. And we would probably get
the same sentence if you and I if I were
to provide you with a tool to take the
audiobook out of the app and if you were
to stick up the driver of the truck that
delivered the CDs to the truck.
>> Unbelievable. I have to ask you about
generative AI the impact on artists and
writers and what it means in terms of uh
>> oh we're never going to get this in two
minutes but let me try.
>> Go ahead.
>> So look the only your boss is insatiably
horny for firing you and replacing you
with an algorithm. That has been true
since the time of the lites. uh bosses
don't like to pay workers and they're
looking for a way to erode the the
rights of workers. If we were to give to
creative workers a new right to control
AI training, those workers would still
have to sell their labor into a market
of five publishers, four studios, three
labels, two companies that control all
the apps, and one ebook audiobook
company. And those companies would
negoti would change their terms of
contract to non-negotiably acquire that
training right. They would license our
data to the AI companies and then they
would buy back the resulting algorithm
and try and put us out of business.
However, we do have some remedies to us.
So the first important one is that the
US copyright office has said correctly
that copyright is only for works of
human creativity. So anything out by a
bot, excuse my language, is not eligible
for a copyright. And the only thing our
bosses hate more than paying us is
having people take the stuff we make for
for them and uh give and using it
without their without paying them
without their permission. So that's the
first thing. And the second thing is
what the writer guild taught us which is
that you can't solve AI with a
copyright, but you can solve it with a
union that has the right for sectoral
bargaining, right? To bargain with all
the studios. And if creative workers are
going to advocate for a new law, let's
not let's not make it a law that our
bosses want, which is a new copyright
law. Let's make it a law that our bosses
hate, which is a sectoral bargaining
right for all creative workers to
bargain with all employers in their
sector because that actually worked.
That was my conversation with Corey
Doctoro, author of the new book
Initification.
If you enjoy this conversation, well, be
sure and check out any of our previous
600 we've done over the prior 12 years.
You can find those at iTunes, Spotify,
YouTube, Bloomberg, wherever you get
your favorite podcasts. [music] I would
be remiss if I didn't thank our Crack
staff who helps us put these
conversations together each week. Alexis
Noriega is my video producer. Sha Russo
is my researcher. Anna Luke is my
producer. I'm Barry Rholtz. You've been
listening to Masters in Business on
Bloomberg Radio.